## Advent of Code

This year I decided to use [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/2024) as an opportunity to practice and learn C++. My main resource for actually learning the syntax of the language was [learncpp](https://www.learncpp.com/).

## Lessons Learned

### Day 1

* `g++ file_path.cpp -o file_path` to compile to binaries.
* `./file_path` to run binaries.
* In C++ `unordered_map` is a hash map, not `map`, which is instead a red black tree.
* Basic file I/O using std::ifstream and string manipulation.

### Day 2

* Within the context of streams `<<` is insertion and `>>` is extraction.
* In C++ most things are not hashable by default, this means that if you want to memoise function arguments
  you should reconstruct the arguments into some user defined type which implements a hashing function.
* Bit manipulation can be used to create efficient composite keys.
* std::tuple provides a convenient way to group related values.

### Day 3

* I learnt a useful parsing pattern where you alternate between a "enabled" and "disabled" mode within a while loop.
* Using const references (`const std::string&`) improves performance by avoiding unnecessary copying.
* String parsing requires careful boundary checking and state management.

### Day 4

* If you know the size of your array use `std::array`, otherwise use `std::vector`.
* You can use uniform initialisation {...} for a clear initialisation that is consistent across different types.

### Day 5

* You can use a combination of `stringstream` and `getline(stream, tmp, <delimiter>)` to iterate through some delimited data. When no delimiter is passed the default behaviour is deliminate by lines.
* You can use the pattern `for (item : iterator)` to iterate over the items in an iterator.
* The interface for getting elements from an unordered map changes depending if the unordered map is constant or not. If constant you cannot use `[key]` since this by default will populate the map with a default value if teh `key` is not present.
* Some useful `map` methods like `contains()` are not available below `c++20`, make sure to add `-std=c++23` to your compile command.

### Day 6

* A trick to make int tuple hashes is to xor the tuple elements. Although you should bit shift each index, else hash(x, y) == hash(y, x), i.e. the hash will be permutation invariant.

### Day 7

* When dealing with large numbers consider using the `long long` type rather than `int`.
  * You will also have to use `stoll()` rather than `stoi` for string to long long conversion.
* The method `to_string()` is overloaded with different types, i.e. in the reverse direction you do not need `itos` and `lltos`.
* When possible try to avoid integer to string conversions, this is expensive both from a time and space viewpoint.

### Day 9

* The idiomatic way to convert characters to ints is to do `d - '0'`. This works because both are converted to their ascii values before the subtraction, so the subtraction is essentially removing the offset associated with '0'.

### Day 11

*When passing parameters by non-const reference (&), you cannot pass literals or temporary expressions because these are rvalues, and non-const references can only bind to lvalues (objects with a persistent memory location).

### Day 12

* The return value of `i++` is `i` before the incrementation operation, while `++i` returns the value of `i` after the incrementation operation. Additionally `++i` is slightly more efficient and the returned option when all you want to do is increment the variable. NOTE: This is not the case for a loop, where you want `i` before the incrementation, hence why `i++` is used.
* When "edge" counting in a problem, a trick is that an edge is uniquely determined by a interior-exterior point pair, using just the interior point is not sufficient.

### Day 13

* In C++ regex you need to use `\\` for special characters like `\d`.
* In C++ regex capture groups, the first capture is the whole string. Meaning that the first actual capture group is at index 1, then 2...


### Day 14
* `gcc` and `clang` are compilers, while `clangd` is a lsp that is seperate from both of these. Importabntly, if you want the LSP to work as intended you need to point it to your standard library headers. This can be done either through your neovim config or by including a `.clangd` file with the necessary include flags. The latter is preferable since it will also explicitly encode things like the c++ standard you are using, which will help others using your code.
* The C++ modulo operator does not perform mathematical modulo, i.e. return the remainder (positive number) associated with the division theorem decomposition of a number. This means -5 % 3 = (-2 * 3 + 1) = -2, in c++, not 1 as it should mathematically.Additionally
* To avoid type conversion you can do ceiling division for integers using (a + b  - 1) / b, the positive term takes it to the next "level" and the minus 1 corrects for the case that it was already at the start of the previous level.
* The `.fill` method for arrays can be useful for initialisation.
* You can use `std::this_thread::sleap_for` to cause your program to wait some amount of time. You can use this with `std::chrono::seconds(10)` to wait for 10 seconds.
